Homework 6
================
Lydia Parr
2021-12-04

Loading in needed package:

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(modelr)
```

## Problem 1

Load and clean the data for regression analysis (converting numeric to
factor where appropriate and checking for missing data).

``` r
birthweight = 
  read_csv("./data/birthweight.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  mutate(
    babysex = as.factor(babysex),
    frace = as.factor(frace),
    mrace = as.factor(mrace),
    malform = as.factor(malform)
  ) 

sum(is.na(birthweight))
```

    ## [1] 0

There are no missing values.

The variables in the data set are babysex, bhead, blength, bwt, delwt,
fincome, frace, gaweeks, malform, menarche, mheight, momage, mrace,
parity, pnumlbw, pnumsga, ppbmi, ppwt, smoken, wtgain.

The literature on low birthweight babies indicates social factors and
health predictors like the mother’s health, fetal health issues, and
previous low birthweight babies contribute to infant birthweight. I will
include family income, maternal race, maternal age at delivery, presence
of malformations, and previous low birth weight babies, and maternal
weight gain during pregnancy as predictors of low birthweight (Moreira,
de Sousa, & Flavio Sarnom, 2018l Reichman & Pagnini,1997).

Moreira, A., Sousa, P., & Sarno, F. (2018). Low birth weight and its
associated factors. *Einstein (Sao Paulo, Brazil), 16*(4), eAO4251.
<https://doi.org/10.31744/einstein_journal/2018AO4251>

Reichman, N. E., & Pagnini, D. L. (1997). Maternal age and birth
outcomes: data from New Jersey. *Family planning perspectives, 29*8(6),
268–295.

My model: E(bwt) = malform + mrace + pnumlbw + wtgain + momage + fincome

Describe your modeling process and show a plot of model residuals
against fitted values – use add\_predictions and add\_residuals in
making this plot.

Fitting the initial model, then checking residuals for regression
diagnostics:

``` r
model_1 = lm(bwt ~ malform + mrace + pnumlbw + wtgain + momage + fincome, data = birthweight)

model_1 %>% broom::tidy() %>%
  select(p.value, term, estimate)
```

    ## # A tibble: 9 x 3
    ##     p.value term        estimate
    ##       <dbl> <chr>          <dbl>
    ## 1  0        (Intercept) 2807.   
    ## 2  3.23e- 1 malform1    -121.   
    ## 3  2.34e-60 mrace2      -278.   
    ## 4  6.14e- 2 mrace3      -137.   
    ## 5  2.78e- 7 mrace4      -167.   
    ## 6 NA        pnumlbw       NA    
    ## 7  6.07e-68 wtgain        11.7  
    ## 8  2.68e- 4 momage         7.45 
    ## 9  1.95e- 2 fincome        0.720

``` r
birthweight  %>%
  modelr::add_predictions(model_1, var = "prediction")  %>%
  modelr::add_residuals(model_1, var = "residual")  %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = prediction, y = residual)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +
  geom_smooth(se = FALSE, method = "lm", color = "red") +
  labs(
    x = "predicted values",
    y = "residuals",
    title = "Residuals and predicted values for model 1"
  )
```

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

![](p8105_hw6_lcp2148_files/figure-gfm/model-1.png)<!-- -->

The residuals look evenly distributed around 0, so this model is
appropriate to use based on this graph.

Compare your model to two others:

One using length at birth and gestational age as predictors (main
effects only) One using head circumference, length, sex, and all
interactions (including the three-way interaction) between these Make
this comparison in terms of the cross-validated prediction error; use
crossv\_mc and functions in purrr as appropriate.

``` r
crossvalidation = 
  crossv_mc(birthweight, 100) %>%
  mutate(
    test = map(test, as_tibble), 
    train = map(train, as_tibble)
  )
crossvalidation = crossvalidation %>%
    mutate(
      mod1 = map(train, ~lm(bwt ~ malform + mrace + pnumlbw + wtgain + momage + 
                            fincome, data = .x)), 
      mod2 = map(train, ~lm(bwt ~ blength + gaweeks, data = .x)),
      mod3 = map(train, ~lm(bwt ~ bhead + blength + babysex + babysex*blength + 
                            babysex*bhead + blength*bhead + babysex*blength*bhead, 
                            data = .x))
  ) %>%
  mutate(
    rmse_mod1 = map2_dbl(mod1, test, ~rmse(model = .x, data = .y)),
    rmse_mod2 = map2_dbl(mod2, test, ~rmse(model = .x, data = .y)),
    rmse_mod3 = map2_dbl(mod3, test, ~rmse(model = .x, data = .y)),
  )
```

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

    ## Warning in predict.lm(model, data): prediction from a rank-deficient fit may be
    ## misleading

``` r
crossvalidation %>% 
  select(starts_with("rmse")) %>% 
  pivot_longer(
    everything(),
    names_to = "model", 
    values_to = "rmse",
    names_prefix = "rmse_") %>% 
  mutate(model = fct_inorder(model)) %>% 
  ggplot(aes(x = model, y = rmse)) +
  geom_violin(aes(fill = model)) +
  scale_x_discrete(labels = c("mod1" = "model 1",
                              "mod2" = "model 2",
                              "mod3" = "model 3")) +
  labs(
    x = "model",
    y = "RMSE",
    title = "RMSE across 3 models"
  )
```

![](p8105_hw6_lcp2148_files/figure-gfm/models-1.png)<!-- -->

Based on the plot of the RMSE for the three models, model 3 is the best
model, as it has the lowest RMSE value. This means the most optimal
model to examine predictors of low birthweight is the one using using
head circumference, length, sex, and all interactions (including the
three-way interaction).

## Problem 2

The bootstrap is helpful when you’d like to perform inference for a
parameter / value / summary that doesn’t have an easy-to-write-down
distribution in the usual repeated sampling framework. We’ll focus on a
simple linear regression with tmax as the response and tmin as the
predictor, and are interested in the distribution of two quantities
estimated from these data:

First, I load in the data:

``` r
weather_df = 
  rnoaa::meteo_pull_monitors(
    c("USW00094728"),
    var = c("PRCP", "TMIN", "TMAX"), 
    date_min = "2017-01-01",
    date_max = "2017-12-31") %>%
  mutate(
    name = recode(id, USW00094728 = "CentralPark_NY"),
    tmin = tmin / 10,
    tmax = tmax / 10) %>%
  select(name, id, everything())
```

    ## Registered S3 method overwritten by 'hoardr':
    ##   method           from
    ##   print.cache_info httr

    ## using cached file: ~/Library/Caches/R/noaa_ghcnd/USW00094728.dly

    ## date created (size, mb): 2021-09-14 10:30:55 (7.599)

    ## file min/max dates: 1869-01-01 / 2021-09-30

Next I begin bootstrapping:

``` r
set.seed(1)

boot_sample = function(df) {
  sample_frac(df, replace = TRUE)
}

boot_data = 
  data_frame(
    strap_number = 1:5000, 
    strap_sample = rerun(5000, boot_sample(weather_df))
  )
```

    ## Warning: `data_frame()` was deprecated in tibble 1.1.0.
    ## Please use `tibble()` instead.
    ## This warning is displayed once every 8 hours.
    ## Call `lifecycle::last_warnings()` to see where this warning was generated.

Next I look at r\*\*2, plotting the distribution of the estimates

``` r
boot_1 = 
  boot_data  %>%
  mutate(
    models = map(strap_sample, ~lm(tmax ~ tmin, data = .x)),
    results = map(models, broom::glance)
  ) %>%
  select(-strap_sample, -models) %>%
  unnest(results)

boot_1 %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  summarize(
    lower_limit = quantile(r_squared, c(.025)),
    upper_limit = quantile(r_squared, c(.975)),
  ) %>%
  knitr::kable()
```

| lower\_limit | upper\_limit |
|-------------:|-------------:|
|    0.8936684 |     0.927106 |

``` r
boot_1 %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = r.squared)) +
  geom_density() +
  labs(
    x = "r**2 values",
    y = "density",
    title = "Distribution of simulated r**2 estimates"
  )
```

![](p8105_hw6_lcp2148_files/figure-gfm/boot_1-1.png)<!-- -->

log(β̂ 0∗β̂ 1) Use 5000 bootstrap samples and, for each bootstrap sample,
produce estimates of these two quantities. Plot the distribution of your
estimates, and describe these in words. Using the 5000 bootstrap
estimates, identify the 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles to provide a 95%
confidence interval for r̂ 2 and log(β̂ 0∗β̂ 1). Note: broom::glance() is
helpful for extracting r̂ 2 from a fitted regression, and broom::tidy()
(with some additional wrangling) should help in computing log(β̂ 0∗β̂ 1).
